---
layout: post
title: "God or not?"
description: "The single determinant wavefunction is discussed"
category: articles
tags: [philosophy, god, self, observation]
modified: 201-06-07
image:
  feature: so-simple-sample-image-3.jpg
  credit: Michael Rose
  creditlink: http://mademistakes.com
comments: false
share: true
---

There is a general “waste of time” feeling I get when discussing this topic
with others that I think stems from the notion that agreement will never be
reached. 

That may be so. 

Yet, I think it is worth clarifying the points we **can** all agree on --- and
then arguing from there.

Let me illustrate what I mean. 

## Our shared experiences

I think many of us can agree that God is not an old gentleman with a beard
floating in the clouds. 

If you think about *why* you believe this, you will realize that it is because
of your past experience. You’ve never seen an old man floating in the clouds,
have you? So your conclusion is based on extrapolations from past observations.

Likewise, some of us may have tried the old “pact with God experiment”. It goes
something like this: 

> God, if you are listening, if you (do something for me) I
> will be forever indebted and (do somthing for you).

This kind of thing generally doesn’t work. The problem is, we simply don’t hear
a voice in our heads that we can converse with. So the conclusion is that God,
if he exists, doesn’t talk back in a straightforward way.

So, there are some things about God many of us can agree on.

## God’s nature

What exactly are the characteristics that we would agree our God to have?

In the Jewish-Christian-Muslim tradition there is only “one” God. Actually, 
even though I repeat it, that claim always annoys me because the idea goes
back at least to the Zoroastrians, if not to Pharoah Akhenaten in 1300 BC, or
thereabouts. Put that aside for a moment. Let’s agree to think in this
framework. Clearly the notion of God at least presupposes the notion of “you”
and “him”. 

Therefore, pretty early in the game of talking about God you are faced with the
notion of “other” people or entities.

And before considering “others” we should think about our “self”. 

## The dismembered Self

“I think, therefore I am” doesn’t get us very far. 

For me, it was much more productive to consider the question: 

>Where is my “self”?

The self is obviously not in our hands. We’ve seen others without hands and
we don’t consider their self diminished. 

And we can continue down this ghastly thought-track, chopping off limbs, and
replacing organs by machines, and we realize that the self is somehow embedded
in the head region, the brain. We know it’s true because people with head
injuries often have deep personality changes. The self is localized in the
brain.

Or is it?

## The reconstructed Self

The brain is a large nexus of nerves, chemicals, a memory store. But we
can store memories elsewhere, these days. Photographs. Diaries. Increasingly
in our smart devices. Perhaps in the future these “external” (to the brain)
memories and data will be stored “in the cloud” and we will obtain them with
direct brain links. This would be amazing. Yet, it is not any different to what
we do now when we read our diaries or look at our photographs --- we are just
talking about replacing our hands and eyes with other things. It is not a
difference of principle.

What we are beginning to see here is that while some parts of the “self”
are localized in the brain, it is very difficult to be sure that all of
you is really there. At the moment memories are largely stored in the brain,
but not exclusively. 

Carrying this thought forward, we see that when our hands are chopped off we do
indeed lose part of our “self”.

## The Other

Perhaps I’m going too fast, but you must surely have got the idea that your
“self” is not an isolated entity. 

Just to make sure you understand: these words you are reading are a
communication from my “self” to “you”, as if I spoke them, but they are ---
where exactly? On Google’s servers? On the screen your reading? In the signals
in your optic nerve? In “your” brain?

Am I in your brain?

Well, yes. In a sense. To a certain extent. According to a certain
definition or outlook.

The point I am making is that you and I are interdependent, and that
it is absolutely not clear that we are (completely) separate entities.

## Twins

Let’s try another example, some other shared experiences. 

The case of Siamese twins is interesting. 

Depending on which parts are connected (bodies, heads, brains) they
increasingly become more conjoined in all senses of the word. We see here that
“self” and “other” form a continuous spectrum. But the Siamese twins are an
accident of biology. In the future there seems no reason why we can’t achieve
such joining by non-biological means. Or perhaps by genetic engineeing, if the
ethics could ever be sorted out.

The outcome of these considerations is that “self” and “other” are just
convenient and useful terminologies --- for the time being. There is nothing
universal about either. There is no universal individualism. For some reason
(which people like Dawkins claim to explained) it exists to a certain
extent in our world.

## God or not?

Our conclusion about wholism has many deep and fundamental consequences. About
morality, justice, the notion of competition, discrimination. 

Do pause and think about it.

Coming back to the original question: is there is a God or not?

One of the consequences of the above argument is that God, if he exists, is not
to be regarded as different from us --- in principle. I think the question of
whether God exists is therefore moot. I choose to subscribe to what I understand
to be Spinoza’s view, that God is in fact the totality of what is observed.
That also seems to be the essence of the Bhuddist view.

## And you?

The arguments and conclusions drawn here are based on simple observations and
shared experiences that we or others have had. There are some who do not share
such experiences, who do not admit such experiences as valid. They have their
own experiences, thoughts,  which I do not share, or cannot accept. There are
some who make *a priori* definitions about what is and what is not. I do not
want to say that these people are “right” or “wrong”. I only acknowledge that
they *are*. For them, these arguments will not apply.

Did we achieve anything in this discussion? You decide.


